MEDICAL GENERAL EXCLUSIONS AND LIMITATIONS

1. Services rendered to the Participant or Dependent prior to the date his/her coverage becomes effective. For the purposes of the coverage, an expense shall be deemed to have been incurred on the date the service or supply for which the charge is made was received. 
2. Dental services of any kind except expenses specifically covered herein.
3. Cosmetic surgery or treatment and any related expenses except those expenses for cosmetic surgery or treatment described in this Plan. Expenses related to complications of cosmetic procedures shall not be covered, unless the original cosmetic procedure was covered by the Plan.
4. Eyeglasses, eye exercises, contact lenses, hearing aids, or examinations for the prescription or fitting of eyeglasses or hearing aids unless required due to interocular surgery, or to an accidental bodily injury to the eye or ear performed or sustained while the person is covered under this Plan. This Plan does not cover refractive surgical procedures or treatment of the eye, e.g., Radial Keratotomy (RK) or Photorefractive Keratotomy (PRK) conditions. The Plan also does not cover treatments for eye alignment problems, e.g., Strabismus, Esotropia or Exotropia, by corrective lens, surgery, vision training or any other means;
5. Services received for any condition, illness, injury or complication thereof arising out of or in the course of any employment (including self-employment) or occupation for compensation or profit.
6. Expenses for services furnished the Covered Person in any Veteran's Hospital or Military Hospital (except for non-service related disabilities not otherwise excluded hereunder), institution or facility operated by the United States government, or by any state government, or by any agency or instrumentality of such government. This provision is subject to any governmental provision or regulation which requires that benefits of this Plan be utilized before benefits are available thereunder. The provisions of the immediately preceding exclusion do not apply to benefits available under the Health Insurance for the Aged and Disabled provisions of the United States Social Security Act as now or hereafter amended.
7. Services received as a result of injury or sickness while the Covered Person was participating in an act of war, declared or undeclared, or any type of military conflict.
8. Services for which neither the Participant nor the Dependent incurs a legal obligation to pay including services provided by a family member, (spouse, son, daughter, brother, sister or parent), or fees or portions of fees which have been or will be discounted or reduced, or for which no charge would have been made in the absence of coverage.
9. Service expenses in excess of the Reasonable and Customary charge for such services.
10. Expenses related to intentionally self-inflicted injury or attempted suicide committed while sane or insane.
11. Charges for genetic testing;
12. Expenses incurred for or related to the reversal of sterilization.
13. Contraceptive services other than any Food and Drug Administration approved contraceptive methods, sterilization procedures, and patient education and counseling for all women with reproductive capacity with a physician issued prescription.
14. Expenses incurred to treat infertility or to affect the inducement of pregnancy by artificial means, i.e. artificial insemination or in vitro fertilization or any surgery or treatment to induce pregnancy.
15. Services in connection with elective abortions.
16. Charges related to or in connection with pregnancy or complications of pregnancy of a Dependent child including expenses for a newborn child born to a Dependent child;
17. Wigs or toupees (except as specifically stated under Covered Expenses), hair transplants, hair weaving or any drug if such drug is used in connection with the treatment of baldness;.
18. Charges for nutritional counseling, special foods, food supplements, liquids, diet plans or any related products; .
19. Membership costs for health clubs, weight loss clinics and similar programs
20. Charges for services in connection with treatment of obesity or weight reduction.
21. Charges related to hypnotherapy, except as part of a physician's outpatient treatment of a mental illness or when hypnosis is used in lieu of an anesthetic.
22. Charges for acupuncture treatment (meridian therapy).
23. Charges for Biofeedback;
24. Charges for treatment of sexual dysfunctions or inadequacies;
25. Charges for penile implants or treatment of impotency;
26. For charges related to sexual surgery, gender reassignment or disturbances gender identification 
27. Charges for services or supplies for custodial or sanitarium care or rest cures.
28. Education, training and bed and board while confined in an institution which is mainly a school or other institution for training, a place of rest, a place for the aged or a nursing home.
29. Charges for expenses for treatment related to an Illness or Injury caused by the Covered Person's commission or attempted commission of a felony or being engaged in an illegal act, riot or insurrection.
30. Charges for expenses for treatment not actually rendered.
31. Charges for surgery or treatment which is experimental including drugs, research studies or for any services or supplies not considered legal in the United States.
32. Charges for educational, vocational, or other non-medical or non-illness related counseling, self-help training or other training services, unless specifically included in this Plan. Care and treatment of mental health conditions shall be limited to those specified as Covered Expenses.
33. Charges for expenses incurred more than twelve (12) months prior to the date the claim for benefits is received by the Third Party Administrator;
34. Charges for services of the clergy who would normally not make a charge for services that are rendered during the course of their normal practice as a member of the clergy.
35. Expenses for travel or accommodations or other non-medical expense, whether or not recommended by a physician or necessary to obtain medical care, unless specifically covered under this Plan.
36. Expenses not specifically listed as a Covered Expense.
37. Expenses for devices, supports or braces or any other supply, treatment or equipment necessary to allow participation in athletics or fitness activities but are not Medically Necessary.
38. For the services related to: (a) Weak, strained, flat, unstable or unbalanced feet, or metatarsalgia, except open cutting operations; or (b) Corns, calluses or toenails, except the removal of nail roots and necessary services for the treatment of metabolic or peripheral vascular diseases; or (c) Orthotics in excess of the amount specified in the Schedule of Benefits. 
39. Chelation therapy, except to treat heavy metal poisoning.
40. Ecological or environmental medicine, diagnosis and/or treatment.
41. Herbal medicines, holistic or homeopathic care, including drugs.
42. Examinations or treatment ordered by a court in connection with legal proceedings unless such examinations or treatments otherwise qualify as Covered Expenses.
43. Personal convenience or comfort items including, but not limited to, such items as admission kits, televisions, telephones, first aid kits, exercise equipment, air conditioners, humidifiers, saunas and hot tubs.
44. For standby Physicians or other medical practitioners except where the services are Medically Necessary and satisfactory evidence documenting Medical Necessity has been received.
45. Telephone consultations, completion of claim forms, or missed appointments.
46. Smoking cessation programs with the exception of the prescription Chantix.
47. Treatment for Temporomandibular Joint Disorder (TMJ) unless specifically stated as covered.